Project Composition (#1584)
bonitasoft/bonita-doc: modules/ROOT/pages/project-structure.adoc

= Project structure
:description: This page defines what the elements are within a Bonita Automation project, as well as how some of them are structured to create a Living Application.

> This page defines what the elements are within a Bonita Automation project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page defines the elements used to compose a Bonita Automation project.
```

> == Bonita Automation project elements

Reviewer: I suggest to talk about concept instead of element, element is way to abstract IMHO, it defines everything and nothing in the same time.

```suggestion
== Bonita Automation project concepts
```

Author: Got to check with @NathalieC

Bonita Automation projects are based on processes but also data, user interfaces, identity management and extensions.

[.text-center]
image:images/BonitaProjectElements.png[]
// {.img-responsive .img-thumbnail}

> Note that not all elements are required and they are alternative ways of doing. However, using the provided elements enables to use the full potential of the Bonita platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
Using all the concepts in a projet allows to take the full advantage of the Bonita platform.
However, it is not required to use all the concepts to create a valid Bonita Automation project.
====
```

=== Process Elements
[cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Element |Description |Create/Provided | Tool | Alternative

> |Processes

Reviewer: The root artifact is the Diagram, which contain processes.
```suggestion
|xref:diagram-overview.adoc[Diagrams]
```

|BPMN diagram that describes your business processes
|Create
|Studio

> |--

Reviewer: Actually we do have alternatives, for ex Baptiste developed a Kotlin DSL years ago to create Bonita processes in Kotlin, without having to design them in the Studio. The engine also have a similar DSL in Java, but I don't know if someone ever used it.

Reviewer: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=08LiZAcEzDA 
cc @baptistemesta :p

> |Forms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:forms.adoc[Forms]
```

|Web interfaces used for human interactions with your processes
|Create
|UI Designer

> |Use BPM REST API

Reviewer: ?

> |Actor filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:creating-an-actor-filter.adoc[Actor filter]
```

|Filters users that can access a human task in a process
|A couple are provided in the Marketplace and you can create custom actor filters

> |Studio or SDK (custom connectors)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Studio or SDK (custom actor filters)
```

|-

> |Connectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:connectors-overview.adoc[Connectors]
```

|Web interfaces used for human interactions with your processes
|A dozen connectors are provided in the Marketplace and you can create custom connectors
|Studio or SDK (custom connectors)
|-

|=== 

=== Data
[cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Element |Description |Create/Provided | Tool | Alternative

> |Business Data Model(BDM)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:define-and-deploy-the-bdm.adoc[Business Data Model] (BDM)
```

|Create

> |Structure of the business data to be used with your processes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Structure of the business data used by your processes
```

|Studio
|External data base w/ provided connector

|=== 

=== Identity Management
[cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Element |Description |Create/Provided | Tool | Alternative

> |Organization (for "Actors" and "Profiles")

Reviewer: It is also used to define REST API Extension permissions, and dynamic permissions (both can be mapped to users / groups / roles / memberships and profiles)

> |Organization (for "Actors" and "Profiles")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:organization-overview.adoc[Organization] (for "Actors" and "Profiles")
```

|The definition of the user base that will use the processes (includes users, roles and groups)
|Example provided/Create
|Studio

> |--

Reviewer: Organization can be created / updated from the portal. Tools like the LDAP synchronizer are often use to populate the organization.

|===

=== Living Applications
[cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Element |Description |Create/Provided | Tool | Alternative

> |Application descriptor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:applicationcreation.adoc[Application descriptor]
```

|Defines the *living applications*: group of pages with a specific them for a given user profile
|Create
|Studio

> |xml editor

Reviewer: Living app can be created and edited from the Portal too.

> |Application pages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:pages.adoc[Application pages]
```

|Web pages used within your applications
|Create
|UI Designer
|Front-end framework

> |Layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:layouts.adoc[Layout]
```

|Used to define the main frame of an application.

> |Provided

Reviewer: Users can create new Layouts from the UID, it is often used.

|UI Designer
|Front-end framework

> |Theme

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:themes.adoc[Theme]
```

|Defines the look and feel of your application
|A default theme is provided and you can create custom theme

> |--

Reviewer: We provide a Maven archetype to create themes...

|--

|=== 

> For a Bonita Automation project with no application, the last 4 elements are not needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concepts of Application descriptors, Application pages, layouts and themes are only used by Application. A Bonita Automation project without applications won't use those concepts.
```

== Extensions
Bonita Automation project can be extended by creating custom components. These are called extensions.

> Some extensions are used to add elements to those provided while other are used to enable more possibilities in the platform.

Reviewer: I do not understand the sentence 'Some extensions are used to add elements to those provided', what are you trying to say? 

```suggestion
Some extensions are used to add elements to those provided while others are used to enforce the Bonita platform possibilities.
```

> All the extension can developped outside the Studio with your favorite IDE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extensions can be developed outside of the Studio with your favorite IDE.
```

[cols="1,1,1"]
|===
|Extension |When to use | Tool

|Connector
|When the provided connector do not cover your requirements

> |Dedicated SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:connector-archetype.adoc[Dedicated SDK]
```

|Actor Filters
|When the provided actor filter do not cover your requirements

> |Dedicated SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:actor-filter-archetype.adoc[Dedicated SDK]
```

|Theme
|When the provided theme do not cover your requirements

> |Dedicated SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:customize-living-application-theme.adoc[Dedicated SDK]
```

|REST API Extension

> |To interact with third party system outside processes, to make advanced BDM queries or API calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|To interact with third party system outside processes, to make advanced BDM queries or API calls (read only)
```

> |Dedicated SDK or in the Studio (when Business Data is manipulated)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|xref:rest-api-extension-archetype.adoc[Dedicated SDK] or in the Studio (when Business Data is manipulated)
```

|===

== Bonita Project Composition

> Extensions are re-usable elements. They can be shared between several projects. To create your Bonita Automation project with these extension elements, we are using Maven. The extensions are defined as Maven dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extensions are re-usable elements, they can be shared between projects. 
Extensions are added to Bonita Automation projects as Maven dependencies.
```

> In the Studio, the extensions can be managed in a xref:managing_extension_studio.adoc[dedicated view].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Studio, extensions are managed in a xref:managing_extension_studio.adoc[dedicated view].
```

> We strongly recommend that you publish your extensions on private or public repository to fully the power of maven.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
Even if it is possible to manually import extensions in Bonita Studio, it is highly recommended to publish your extensions on public or private maven repositories.
xref:connector-archetype#_6_publish_the_connector_on_github_packages[Here] is an example on how to deploy an extension on Github packages.
====
```

> Of course it is still possible to import extension that aren't published on a repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

= Project structure
:description: This page defines what the elements are within a Bonita Automation project, as well as how some of them are structured to create a Living Application.

This page defines the elements used to compose a Bonita Automation project.

> == Bonita Automation project elements

Reviewer 2: The above paragraph is pretty important to the Product Management team as well as for the Pre-Sales team.
It will also be described in the Training.

|xref:define-and-deploy-the-bdm.adoc[Business Data Model] (BDM)
|Structure of the business data used by your processes
|Create
|Studio
|External data base w/ provided connector

|=== 

=== Identity Management
[cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Element |Description |Create/Provided | Tool | Alternative

|xref:organization-overview.adoc[Organization] (for "Actors" and "Profiles")
|The definition of the user base that will use the processes (includes users, roles and groups)
|Example provided/Create
|Studio/Admin Application/LDAP synchronizer(Enterprise Edition only)
|--
|===

=== Living Applications
[cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
|Element |Description |Create/Provided | Tool | Alternative

|xref:applicationcreation.adoc[Application descriptor]
|Defines the *living applications*: group of pages with a specific them for a given user profile
|Create
|Studio/Admin Application
|xml editor

|xref:pages.adoc[Application pages]
|Web pages used within your applications
|Create
|UI Designer
|Front-end framework

|xref:layouts.adoc[Layout]
|Used to define the main frame of an application.
|Provided
|UI Designer
|Front-end framework

|xref:themes.adoc[Theme]
|Defines the look and feel of your application

> |A default theme is provided and you can create custom theme

Reviewer 2: themes

|Studio or xref:customize-living-application-theme.adoc[Dedicated SDK] (custom theme)
|--

|=== 

> The concepts of Application descriptors, Application pages, layouts and themes are only used by Application. A Bonita Automation project without applications won't use those concepts.

Reviewer 2: will not

== Extensions

> Bonita Automation project can be extended by creating custom components. These are called extensions.

Reviewer 2: A Bonita Automation project
components -> elements

> Some extensions are used to add elements to those provided while others are used to enforce the Bonita platform possibilities.

Reviewer 2: I do not understand which ones you refer to in each category

Extensions can be developed outside of the Studio with your favorite IDE.

[cols="1,1,1"]
|===
|Extension |When to use | Tool

> |Connector

Reviewer 2: Connectors

> |When the provided connector do not cover your requirements

Reviewer 2: does not

|xref:connector-archetype.adoc[Dedicated SDK]

|Actor Filters

> |When the provided actor filter do not cover your requirements

Reviewer 2: does not

|xref:actor-filter-archetype.adoc[Dedicated SDK]

|Theme

> |When the provided theme do not cover your requirements

Reviewer 2: does not

|xref:customize-living-application-theme.adoc[Dedicated SDK]

|REST API Extension
|To interact with third party system outside processes, to make advanced BDM queries or API calls (read only)
|xref:rest-api-extension-archetype.adoc[Dedicated SDK] or in the Studio (when Business Data is manipulated)

|===

> == Bonita Project Composition

Reviewer 2: Bonita project composition
